This week’s case, ‘Helen’, is based on a 22 year old female third year medical student who suffers from addiction to alcohol and cannabis. The main physiological systems involved in this case are memory, emotion and learning. Structurally, this includes the Limbic System and other associated brain structures. Depression is also a key theme to this case. In addition, the drug intervention used (acamprosate) must also be investigated.

 

Limbic System

The limbic system, which is strongly associated with the hypothalamus, is essential for adaptive behaviour including the ability to learn new responses based on previous experiences. The associated areas of the neocortex are capable of analysing exteroceptive information from the environment and other individuals, enabling adaptive personal and social responses. The hypothalamus, limbic system and association neocortex act as interfaces in a hierarchal fashion between the internal structure of the individual and the environment.

 

Limbic system consists of a number of structures. The powerful input to the limbic system from the neocortical association areas link complex “goal-directed” behaviour with more primitive, instinctive behaviour and internal homeostasis in the cascade of neural connections. This means we can conceive information from the outside world in modality specific ways (touch, taste, vision and hearing), which are refined in the parieto-occipital association areas. The information is then conveyed to the frontal association areas involved in planned behaviour (regulation) and also to the inferior temporal association areas, where information can reach supramodal status and meaning.

 

Entry of information to the limbic system occurs either directly to the amygdale or indirectly to the hippocampal formation, via the entorhinal area. The limbic system is able to influence motor responses, appropriate to its informational analyses, through projections to the nucleus accumbens, which forms part of the basal ganglia.

 

Hypothalamus

 

The hypothalamus is able to integrate interoceptive signals from internal organs and fluid-filled cavities and make appropriate adjustments to the internal environment by virtue of its input and output systems. The hypothalamic input is circulatory and neural in origin. The circulating blood provides physical (temperature and osmolality), chemical (glucose concentration, acid-base state) and hormonal signals about the state of the body, its growth and development and its readiness for action.

 

Hippocampal Formation

The hippocampal formation consists of the hippocampus, the dentate gyrus and parts of the parahippocampal gyrus. The hippocampus is formed from an infolding of the inferomedial part of the temporal lobe into the lateral ventricle, along the line of the choroid fissure. The dentate gyrus lies between the parahippocampal gyrus and the hippocampus.

Almost any type of sensory experience causes activation of at least some part of the hippocampus. It in turn distributes many outgoing signals to the anterior thalamus, hypothalamus and other parts of the limbic system, especially through the fornix. In this way the hippocampal formation is an additional channel through which incoming sensory input can elicit behavioural reactions for different purposes. As in other limbic structures stimulation of the hippocampus can cause almost any of the different behavioural patterns (pleasure, rage, passivity e.t.c).

 

Cingulate Gyrus

The cingulate gyrus and parahippocampal gyrus are continuous with each other around the corpus callosum. The cingulate gyrus projects to the parahippocampal gyrus via the fibres of the cingulum. The principle structures of the limbic system are thus linked by a series of connections, which forms the Papez Circuit.

 

Depression

Depression more accurately called major depression, in order to distinguish it from a simple depressed mood, is a mental disorder typically characterised by a pervasive low mood, low self esteem and loss of interest or pleasure in usual activities. Depressed people may be preoccupied with or repeatedly mull over thoughts of worthlessness, inappropriate guilt or regret and helplessness or hopelessness. Other symptoms include poor concentration and memory, withdrawal from social situations and activities, reduced sex drive and thoughts of death or suicide.

The diagnosis of major depression is based on the patient’s self reported experiences, behaviour reported by relatives or friends and mental state. There is no lab test for depression.

Most patients are treated in the community with antidepressants and supportive counselling along with psychotherapy. Admission to hospital might be necessary in cases with associated self neglect or a significant risk of harm to self or others.

 

Addiction

Drug addiction is a chronic, relapsing disorder in which compulsive drug seeking and drug taking behaviour persists despite serious negative consequences. The addictive substances induce pleasant states (euphoria in the initiation stage) or relieve distress. Continued use causes adaptive changes in the central nervous system that leads to tolerance, physical dependence, sensitisation, craving and relapse. Generally addictive drugs can act as positive reinforcers (producing euphoria) or as negative reinforcers (alleviating the symptoms of withdrawal). Environmental stimuli associated with drug use itself can also induce a conditioned response in the absence of the drug.

 

Addiction to Cannabis

The use of marijuana/hashish produces feelings of relaxation and wellbeing and impairs cognitive function and the performance of psychomotor tasks. Overdose can induce panic attacks and psychosis. There is also a strong correlation between cannabis use and schizophrenia. The symptoms of withdrawal, restlessness, irritability and insomnia, are subtle and appear in long term users.

 

Addiction to Alcohol

When ethanol is giving at low doses or initially during acute ethanol intoxication, it is perceived as a stimulant due to the suppression of central inhibitory systems. However, as the plasma levels of ethanol rises, sedation, motor incoordination, ataxia and impaired psychomotor performance appears. The withdrawal syndrome of seizures and dementia tremens can be severe and clinically challenging.

Ethanol modifies the activity of serotonin receptors, nicotine receptors, GABA receptors and the NMDA subtype of glutamate receptors. Its action on all the receptors is the result of a direct interaction with the receptor protein.

 

Treatment of Alcohol Addiction

Acamprosate, also known as Campral, is a drug that is used to treat alcoholism. It is thought to stabilise the chemical balance in the brain that is disrupted in alcoholics, possibly by blocking NMDA receptors of glutamate neurones, while GABA receptors are activated.

Studies have shown that it only works in combination with attendance of support groups and abstinence from alcohol. Some of its side effects include allergic reactions, irregular heartbeats and low/high blood pressure.

Alcohol inhibits the activity of NMDA receptors resulting in over production of these receptors in alcoholics. Hence, sudden alcohol abstinence causes these excessive numbers of NMDA receptors to be more active than usual, resulting in symptoms like delirium tremens. Withdrawal from alcohol also induces a surge in release of excitatory neurotransmitters like glutamate, which activate these receptors. Acamprosate reduces this glutamate surge, reducing the negative effects of alcohol withdrawal.