
Development of the Central Nervous system, flow of CSF through the ventricles, and cranial and spinal meninges


Development of the CNS

 

The primary three layers of embryonic development are ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm. Ectoderm gives rise to skin and the nervous system. During third week of embryonic development dorsal midline ectoderm thickens to form neural plate and the lateral part forms the neural folds. They then fuse together to form neural groove and creating neural tube. The initiation of this process is by bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) particularly BMP-7 produced by non-neural ectoderm. Some of the cells of the apices form the neural crest. Formation of the neural tube is complete by about fourth week of embryonic development.

 

There is maximal differentiation in the rostral part of the neural tube, which becomes the brain. The caudal portion becomes the spinal cord. The central cavity becomes the ventricles. The neural crest cell becomes the sensory ganglia of the cranial and spinal nerves and the autonomic ganglia. Dorsal and ventral region are commonly called the alar and basal plate. Nerve cell bodies of the alar plate have sensory function and nerve cell bodies of the basal plate are predominantly motor.

 

During the fifth week of embryonic development, three primary brain vesicles can be identified called the prosencephalon(forebrain), mesencephalon (midbrain) and rhombencephalon(hindbrain). They differentiate into secondary brain vesicles by the seventh week of embryonic development. Prosencephalon differentiates into telencephalon, which becomes the cerebral hemisphere and diencephalon, which becomes the thalamus. Mesencephalon becomes the midbrain. Rhombencephalon differentiates into metencephalon, which becomes the pons and the cerebellum and myelencephalon, which becomes the medulla oblongata. At later stage of embryonic development cerebrum takes the executive role. Other structures are subservient.

 

The central cavity also increase in size and forms a system of chambers or ventricles, where the CSF is produced and stays, which helps the brain to float on it. The structures for vision and hearing do not develop a great deal and they fulfil automatic, reflex functions. But the superior and inferior colliculus can be seen on the dorsal portion of the midbrain. Some of the fibres for vision go to the superior colliculus and some of the fibres for hearing go to the inferior colliculus. After the closure of the neural tube otic placodes form, this develops into structures needed for hearing and balance. The lens placodes develops into structures needed for vision.

 

Flow of CSF in the brain

 

CSF is produced in the choroid plexus present in the venticles. 500ml of CSF produced everyday and 150ml of it stays in the ventricles. The CSF is made from the plasma, but the concentration of different proteins and other products in the CSF differs from the plasma.  The CSF moves from the lateral ventricles to the third ventricle through the interventricular foramen, which connects the lateral ventricles and the third ventricle. It travels form third ventricle to fourth ventricle through the cerebral aqueduct, which connects the third ventricle with fourth ventricle. From the third ventricle it is drained into the two lateral foramen of Lushka and one medial foramen of magendie. From these structures it flows into the subarachnoid space and is returned to the venous system via the arachnoid villi. When the pressure in the subarachnoid space is greater than the pressure in the venous system, CSF is absorbed into the venous system.

 

CSF has several different roles. They are to: protect the brain and spinal cord against mechanical trauma, provide mechanical buoyancy and support for the brain, serves as a reservoir and assists in the regulation of the contents of the skull, plays an active part in the nourishment of nervous tissue and assists in the removal of products of neuronal metabolism.Lumbar puncture is done at the level of L4-L5 to collect CSF to diagnose diseases such as multiple sclerosis.

 

Cranial meninges: There are three cranial meninges, the outer dura mater, the middle arachnoid mater and the inner pia mater. The outer dura mater has two layers, the outer periosteal layer and the inner meningeal layer. The dura mater is supplied by the middle meningeal artery, which arises from the maxillary artery in the infratemporal fossa of the skull. The reflections from the dura mater to the cerebrum and cerebellum are falx cerebri, falx cerebella, tentorium cerebella and diaphragm sellae. The middle pia mate is covered by mesothelial cells. There are three different spaces. The space between the cranium and the dura mater is called extradural/epidural space. It is not a natural space, but becomes a space pathologically. The space between the meningeal layer of the dura mater and the arachnoid mater is called subdural space, which is also not a space naturally. The space between the arachnoid mater and pia mater is called subarachnoid space. It is a natural space and contains cerebrospinal fluid(CSF), trabecular cells, arteries and veins.

 

Spinal meninges have the same layout as cranial meninges. There are few differences. The meningeal layer of the dura mater of the cranial meniges is continuous as dura mater of the spinal meninges. The dura mater of the spinal meninges has only one layer (meningeal layer). The pia mater has denticulate ligaments, which adhere to arachnoid and dura mater.