1.       The limbic system

The limbic system controls emotional behaviour and internal factors that motivate people to adapt to a constantly changing external environment. It includes the limbic lobe which is situated on the medial side of the brain, surrounding the limb of the ventricles. The limbic lobe is composed of the cingulate, parahippocampal and dentate gyri, and their associated nuclei, the hippocampus, amygdala and septal nucleus. Input to the limbic system comes from the association cortex areas, olfactory cortex and medial temporal lobe regions. The input is ultimately passed to the hypothalamus which controls the endocrine system and the ANS. The main outputs from the limbic system are to the septal nucleus and hypothalamus, via the stria terminalis and diagonal band of broca, to the temporal cortex and to other autonomic brainstem reticular formation centres and the nucleus accumbens. Damage to the limbic system can elicit inappropriate behavioural patterns. These include motivational behaviour reacting to nutrition and fluid balance, sexual courtship behaviours and expression of mood and affect.

 

2.       Addiction

Addiction:  compulsion to take a drug with loss of control over the drug taking

Dependence: drug induced adaptations in cells and tissues (caused by prolonged use of the drug) that lead to the need to continue drug intake.

Tolerance: necessity to escalate the dose of the drug in order to obtain the same effects as those obtained initially

Sensitisation: gradually enhanced effect of drugs that are abused chronically

In the UK drugs are classified into three main categories

Class A: heroin, cocaine, ecstasy, LSD

Class B: amphetamines, barbiturates, cannabis

Class C: mild amphetamines, benzodiazepines, anabolic steroids

2.1   Cannabis

Cannabis is the most widely abused drug in the UK. It is derived from the female flower of cannabis satira. The plant contains several psychoactive substances but the most significant is terperoid Δ-9 tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Cannabis had a mils sedative effect and users describe a feeling of relaxation. First time users may experience feeling of panic and anxiety. The constituent compounds of cannabis are cannabinoids and its effects are mediated by cannabinoid (CB) receptors. The CB₁ receptor mediates most of the effects of cannabinoids on the CNS, whereas the CB₂ receptor is found at the periphery. The CB₁ receptors are considered to be the most abundant G-protein coupled receptor in the mammalian brain. These receptors are coupled to inhibitory G-proteins that reduce intracellular cAMP production, and inhibit cell membrane Ca2⁺ and K+ channels. Cannabinoids are involved in depolarisation induced suppression of inhibition. They act retrogradely:

a)      Transmission of glutamate causes an influx of Ca2+ into the postsynaptic neurone

b)      Presence of postsynaptic calcium induces the production of endocannabinoids in the postsynaptic neurone

c)       The endocannabinoids are released into the synaptic left

d)      Binding occurs at cannabinoid receptors located on the presynaptic neurone and the signal is carried in the opposite direction

Cannabis appears to mimic this action of endogenous cannabinoids (endocannabinoids). It activates cannabinoid receptors and temporarily reduces the amount of conventional neurotransmitter release, one such neurotransmitter is GABA. Cannabis increases dopaminergic neuronal activity in the ventral tegmental area (VTA), through inhibition in GABA release following stimulation of presynaptic CB1 receptors in the VTA.

2.2   Alcohol

Alcohol induces a range of peripheral and central effects. Acute ingestion increases blood pressure and induces peripheral vasodilation. Chronic use of alcohol leads to severe thiamine deficiency. Thiamine is used in metabolism of alcohol, and its absorption is decreased by alcohol itself.

Like cannabis alcohol also increases the firing rate of dopaminergic cells in the VTA. This increases dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens.  It facilitates the inhibitory effects of GABA and decreases the stimulatory effects of glutamate, it is a CNS depressant.

The nucleus accumbens is a collection of neurons within the ventral striatum. It is thought to play an important role in the reward, pleasure, laughter, addiction, aggression and fear. It is located where the head of the caudate and putamen meet, just lateral to the septum. The principal cell types found in the nucleus accumbens are the medium spiny neurones. These are GABAergic neurones and hence have an inhibitory influence on the neurones they project to.  Alcohol disinhibits dopaminergic neuronal activity in the VTA by positive modulation of GABAergic receptors. This increases the dopaminergic input from the VTA to the medium spiny neurones in the nucleus accumbens. When the medium spiny neurones are activated they release GABA onto the ventral pallidum. This is the mesolimbic system, and is known to be involved in modulating behavioural responses to stimuli that activate feelings of reward and reinforcement of dopamine.   

Alcoholism can be managed by pharmacological and non-pharmacological therapy. Disulfiram is a drug that reduces the rate of oxidation of acetaldehyde. Acetaldehyde is produced during the metabolism of alcohol, by oxidation of alcohol by alcohol dehydrogenase. Normally acetaldehyde is then converted to acetate by aldehyde dehydrogenase to be uses as energy for cells. Disulfiram reduces this from happening and increases the concentration of acetaldehyde. Acetaldehyde is responsible for many of the unpleasant effects of a hangover and therefore can help maintain abstinence. Acamprosate is another drug that can be used. It inhibits glutamate by antagonism at the NMDA receptor. Alcohol inhibits activity of NMDA receptors, so chronic alcohol consumption leads to up regulation of these receptors.  Sudden alcohol abstinence causes these excessive numbers of NMDA receptors to be more active than normal and this can produce symptoms of delirum tremens and excitotoxic neuronal death. Withdrawal from alcohol induces surge in the release of excitatory neurotransmitters like glutamate, which activated NMDA receptors. Acamprosate reduces this glutamate surge. Non pharmacological treatment method includes motivational therapy, education about adverse effects of alcohol and support groups such as ‘Alcoholics Anonymous’. The latter consists of a group of recovering alcoholics providing mutual support and aim to compete abstinence from alcohol. The philosophy is a 12-step approach which requires that alcoholics surrender to a higher power (or God), admit their wrongs and try to rectify them. People who benefit from this approach have religious beliefs, accept abstinence as a goal and were heavily dependent.

