
The case about Helen looks at how this 22 year old, third year medical student is struggling with what seems to be an addiction to alcohol and cannabis. 

Looking at her history, it seems that she has not had the easiest of times. It seems that the problems started before she comes into medical school, when her parents are about to separate and she has seen the fights that they get into. On top of this, it seems that her mother has a problem with drinking too much alcohol too. 

Helen’s problems continue when she enters medical school where it seems that the problems from home have affected her performance in her exams and she has started to drink and use cannabis. These habits get her into trouble with the medical school since she is failing her exams and also with her hall of residence from which she is asked to leave.

Her addictive problem is found out when she goes into the hospital still drunk and her housemates decide that she would be a danger to patients in the hospital and hence phone occupational health. She is found to have a high level of alcohol and cannabinoid concentration in her blood samples and is sent for a psychiatric assessment.

On evaluating her, the psychiatrist was worried because Helen had a personality change from initially very aggressive to becoming rather quiet along with a lack of facial expression and speaking without emotion.

The psychiatrist decided that Helen would benefit from attending a support group for alcoholics in order to help her stop drinking whilst also starting her on acamprosate to help quit drinking.

From this case the group targeted looking at how emotion is processed in the brain (looking at both limbic and mesolimbic systems) and what effect these pathways have on emotional processing. We also tried to look at the neurobiology of addiction to see if we could find out about any alterations in the limbic and mesolimbic pathways that caused addictive behaviours and how we could combat the addiction with different therapies.

We had thus questioned the physiology of the brain and how it functions in emotions however most of the problems here seemed to be more related to the psychological aspect of addiction and how a person finds coping mechanisms for different types of difficulties faced in their lives, with drug use one of them.

Having had time to look over the questions that had arisen during the previous PBL session, we discussed the anatomy of the limbic system and where it was in the brain, with structures such as the orbital frontal cortex, cingulated cortex and hippocampus being the main components of the limbic system and its involvement in emotions and their expression. We also found that the mesolimbic pathway which we had been guided to look at through mentioning of the ‘nucleus accumbens’ in the case, is used as part of the reward pathway of the brain.

Having seen the functions of the two pathways we deemed to be important for this case, we found the physiological link between the drug use and it’s effect on the mesolimbic pathway and how it had caused her to develop an addictive behaviour. This lead onto discussions about the drug therapy that Helen was started on, and the pharmacokinetics of acamprosate.

We wrapped up the session with some ideas behind why Helen was having the problems when taking the drugs (such as the persecutory ideas) and why these could have come about.