This week’s case on Helen was quite interesting as it dealt with a range of psychological disorders and provided cues as to how these conditions may be linked to abnormal physiological processes in the body, especially the neurophysiology of the brain.

Helen initially presented as a typical university student who struggled to balance social life (with lots of drinking) and work at the medical school. However, for various reasons, such as maladaptive responses to stress (probably triggered by divorce of her parents), Helen started to drink excessively and her increasing use of cannabis gradually became a problem for both herself and people around her. Eventually, Helen becomes dysfunctional as she develops serious addictions to alcohol and cannabis.

There are several models that try to describe the process of drug addiction in individuals but the ones I find most interesting are the ‘physical dependence model’ and the ‘positive reward model’. The physical dependence model (also known as the withdrawal avoidance model) postulates that individuals will try to avoid withdrawal symptoms and hence addiction results from dependence. However, this model cannot explain all cases of addiction as some drugs do not produce dramatic withdrawal symptoms as in the case of cocaine. The positive reward model on the other hand suggests that drug self-administration is a behaviour controlled by positive rewards. This is supported by the fact that many addictive drugs cause increased levels of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens which is part of the natural reward circuit in the brain.

Smoking cannabis, for example, leads to formation of several psychoactive substances including THC. THC binds to CB1 receptors which are prominent in the mesolimbic system and causes modulation of glutamatergic signals to stimulate release of dopamine (from dopaminergic cells in the ventral tegmental area) in the nucleus accumbens. This enables powerful addictive drugs to ‘hijack’ the rewards circuit with overwhelming intensity that produces positive reinforcement of the behavior (i.e. smoking cannabis).

Alcohol addiction works in similar processes; alcohol increases the firing of dopaminergic cells in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and causes increased release of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens to create positive reinforcing effects of alcohol. Alcohol does this by serving as an indirect antagonist at NMDA receptors (therefore decrease glutamate) and as an indirect agonist at GABA receptors (thereby increasing GABA). As a result chronic exposure to alcohol has the added effect of upregulating NMDA receptors. Acamprosate, which was prescribed to Helen, is an example of a drug used to assist in management of chronic alcoholism by targeting this molecular mechanism. Acamprosate mainly inhibits excitatory glutamate by antagonism at NMDA receptors (which are upregulated in alcoholics). Hence Acamprosate helps to prevent the glutamate surge that occurs during abstinence, and therefore minimizes the risk of delirium tremens and excitotoxic neuronal death during alcohol withdrawal.

In addition to these physiological processes that may have reinforced Helen’s addictive behaviour, there are also other factors that may have contributed to her overall risk. For example, the fact that her mother was alcoholic is important as alcoholism has a relatively strong genetic component and may have predisposed Helen to develop alcohol addiction. Helen also shows various odd behaviours that point to the fact that she may be clinically depressed. Increasing social isolation, difficulty in concentrating and apathy are characteristic signs and her maladaptive responses to stress and unrest in recent family matters may have been contributory to her overall addictive behavior.