Case 8 treats of a medical student Helen. Helen has had problems with managing her emotions since she was admitted to the medical school. She has been dealing with them with alcohol and cannabis, to which she has become gradually addited. The day she showed up in the hospital for her clinical placement still drunk after last night’s party was the day when professional medical care was offered to her. She was started  on acamprosate (a drug used for treating alcohol dependence by blocking NMDA glutamatergic receptors). She also had sessions with psychiatrist and attending Alcoholics Anonymous was advised to her, as well as close monitoring by a trained person.

In order to understand the pathology of addiction, our PBL group decided that we first have to understand the systems involved in several mental functions. These include limbic system which is responsible for production of memories and concentration. It also participates in evoking emotions in response to various sensory (general and special) stimuli. An important aspect of the case is reward pathway. This is a crucial central nervous system pathway associated with feelings of desire and reward or pleasure. Also known as mesolimbic pathway, it originates in ventral tegmental area of the midbrain, projects into limbic system’s structures such as the amygdala, the nucleus accumbens and the hippocampus and also has connections with the medial prefrontal cortex. The neurotransmitter operating within this pathway is dopamine, the imbalance of which is linked with several pathological conditions such as depression and emotional instability, schizophrenia or addiction. Other important pathophysiological issues worth considering in relation to this case are physiology (but also psychology) of addiction, physical changes in the nervous system following becoming dependent on a substance, GABA- and glutamatergic neurotransmitter systems in the brain, including their production, transmission, receptors, recycling and physiological effects.