Helen is a medical student with academic problems associated with chronic alcohol and drug usage. She struggles with concentration, organisation and memory due to drinking, emotional upset (problems at home) or a combination. Her mother drank heavily, which raises questions about family life/problems with alcohol. Helen’s drinking has resulted in the loss of social support from friends and trouble with the University authorities.

Helen’s symptoms of aggression, mood fluctuations, lack of emotion and memory loss reflect underlying changes in the limbic system due to alcohol and cannabis abuse. The limbic system consists of the hippocampal formation, septal area and amygdala, prefrontal cortex and cingulated gyrus, and communicates with the hypothalamus and periaquaductal gray (PAG). The hippocampal formation has a role in modulation of aggression, spatial learning, short-term memory via the hypothalamus and memory consolidation (through long term potentiation (LTP)). Alcohol is thought to block glutamate binding to NMDA receptors, which has been shown to eliminate LTP. The septal area acts as a relay for transmission of hippocampal impulses to the hypothalamus and has been implicated in control of aggression, rage and drinking behaviour. The basis for these functions is the link with the hypothalamus, using ACTH as a modulator. The amygdala is a collection of nuclei involved in the reward (mesolimbic) pathway (utilising dopamine) and emotional reactions. The prefrontal cortex and cingulate gyrus modulate functions of the hypothalamus such as emotion and intellect, modulation of memory and social interactions.  Many addictive drugs which increase dopamine levels are thought to act on the nucleus accumbens, a collection of neurons within the striatum involved in reward, aggression and fear.

Helen’s treatment options include ‘Alcoholics Anonymous’ for social support in quitting alcohol, and acamprosate, which works by restoring the balance between inhibitory (GABAergic) and excitatory (glutamatergic) transmission in the brain.

Helen has a “critical incident”, a complaint about alcohol abuse which poses a threat to patient safety. Her colleagues act according to guidance on whistle-blowing from the General Medical Council.  She is referred to Occupational Health, who organise psychiatric assessment. Ultimately decisions on Fitness to Practice must be considered.

