This case looked at addictive behaviours and in particular drug addictions of cannabis and alcohol. To understand the effect of these drugs on the body I looked into the neurotransmitter systems within the central nervous system (CNS). For information transmission a nerve impulse must be transmitted from one neuron to another. When an action potential reaches the axon terminal of a primary neuron depolarisation leads to influx of calcium ions into the presynaptic terminal from the synaptic cleft. The calcium ions trigger exocytosis of neurotransmitter by fusion of vesicles containing the transmitter substance into the synaptic cleft. The neurotransmitter binds to its specific receptor on the postsynaptic membrane.

 

Neurotransmitters are either excitatory or inhibitory. In the CNS the major excitatory transmitter is glutamate whilst the inhibitory is GABA. Glutamate binds to its receptors (AMPA and NMDA) on the postsynaptic membrane. This leads to influx of sodium ions into the postsynaptic neuron. NMDA channels are voltage gated and open after AMPA channels, NMDA also allow influx of calcium ions into the postsynaptic neuron. GABA binds to its GABAergic receptor, this leads to chloride ion influx, this negative influx hyperpolarises the cell inhibiting action potential propagation.

 

Alcohol has been found to increase the activity of GABA, increasing inhibitory stimulation thus having a depressant activity on the CNS. Cannabis has an active compound called THC; this is a compound similar in structure to many endogenous endocannabinoids. These bind to CB1 receptors found on the presynaptic neurons in the CNS. The endocannabinoids are normally synthesised by the postsynaptic cell after repeated stimulation. When these bind to the CB1 receptor activity in the presynaptic cell is reduced by lowering influx of calcium ions into the presynaptic cell thus lowering neurotransmitter release from this cell. The CB1 receptor is one of the most numerous in the CNS, therefore cannabis and endocannabinoids have a diffuse action on many brain regions and neurotransmitter systems within the CNS.

 

The Limbic system has also been implicated in addiction; it consists of a number of structures including the Cingulate gyrus, Hippocampus, Mamillary bodies, Anterior Thalamic nuclei, Nucleus Accumbens and Amygdala. Generally the limbic system is involved in learning and memory consolidation via the Papez circuit as well as emotions and fear which involves the Amygdala. Feelings of intense pleasure are thought to involve the release of dopamine by the Ventral Tegmental Area from the midbrain region. Normally bursts of dopamine are fired into the Nucleus Accumbens this dopamine is usually rapidly reuptaken- this gives brief periods of pleasure that are experienced during certain activities such as eating and sex. In drug addiction it is found that drugs act by prolonging dopamine activity in Nucleus Accumbens, this results in an extreme and intense feeling of pleasure when taking drugs, in particular those that block dopamine reuptake such as Amphetamines and Cocaine. Drug users become dependant upon these extreme pleasure sensations and often require increasing doses of the drug to achieve such intense sensations of pleasure. Stopping use of drugs results in withdrawal effects with adverse psychological and physiological effects.

 

Helen also develops psychotic behaviour; she demonstrates paranoia and general atypical behaviours such as aggression, lack of facial expressions and 'swings' in behaviour. Some of these symptoms indicate towards Schizophrenia, which has a usual age of onset in the early 20s. There is a suggested increased risk of schizophrenia in individuals who smoke cannabis although there is much disagreement between any correlation.

 

Schizophrenia as a condition covers a broad area of psychiatric symptoms. The most significant symptom is of auditory hallucinations (hearing voices) and patients express delusional behaviours and though processes. The most widely accepted explanation of schizophrenia is that these patients have excessive dopamine activity in the brain, symptoms manifest as a result of neurochemical imbalance. Most support from this hypothesis comes from the use of dopamine antagonists since dopamine receptor blocking therapy is the most effective therapy for schizophrenia.

 

Helen's treatment focuses on resolving her alcoholism problem. Alcoholics Anonymous is a group she is recommended to attend. Alcoholics Anonymous is a non-profit not-government organisation whose ethos is to enable members to remain sober and totally abstain from alcohol. This involves a 12 step process of reform in which the individual accepts they are unable to control alcohol intake and now choose to abstain completely and reform their lives by correcting their mistakes of the past and present. This group provides a social network for people to share their experiences and combat their alcoholism together.

 

Helen is offered drug therapy for her alcoholism. Acamprosate has been shown to reduce relapse rate once the patient is abstaining from alcohol. The other major therapy is using Disulfarim, an aldehyde dehydrogenase inhibitor, this increases sensitivity to alcohol if consumed by inhibiting the complete metabolism of alcohol. On consuming alcohol unpleasant sensations such as vomiting and dizziness are experienced. This is given to increase abstinence from alcohol.